Kubernetes Worker (#1151)
OctopusDeploy/blog: blog/2024-08/kubernetes-worker/index.md

---
title: Autoscaling Octopus Workers - via Kubernetes
description: The Kubernetes agent is generally available.
author: trent.mohay@octopus.com
visibility: public
published: 2024-08-22-1400
metaImage: img-blog-octopus-k8-worker-2024.png
bannerImage: img-blog-octopus-k8-worker-2024.png
bannerImageAlt: Octopus Deploy logo connected to a Kubernetes-branded box with an Octopus logo in it.
isFeatured: false
tags: 
  - Product
  - Kubernetes
  - Workers
---

> The words belong to go together; it took some work, but we've made it happen.

Author: Shame! I love it :) But it doesn't add information to the blog so it can be removed.

The story starts with the recently completed [Octopus Deploy Kubernetes Agent](https://octopus.com/blog/kubernetes-agent).

> The Kubernetes Agent was our "man on the inside", simplifying deployments into a Kubernetes cluster. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Kubernetes Agent was our "contact on the inside", simplifying deployments into a Kubernetes cluster. 
```

It allowed Deployments to execute Kubernetes commands, from _within_ the cluster.

We've now built a Kubernetes Worker - an extension to the Agent, which is able to execute any workload in the cluster 
(not just Kubernetes commands!).

## Background
To appreciate how this new capability helps you, it's worth explaining the types of machines involved in an deployment:

1. Deployment Targets - machines which host runtime software packages
2. Workers - compute resources required to execute the deployment process.

We’re only going to deal with Workers here - i.e. computers required during a deployment, but are otherwise idle.

When you use a physical or virtual machine as a worker - it works hard at deployment time, but is probably remaining
unused between deployments. Which is a little disappointing.

> Whereas with a Kubernetes worker, each requested operation is executed in a new Kubernetes Pod (horizontal scaling), which

Author: Rereading this, I didn't like the flow.
The sentence above talks about minimising idle time cost - while this paragraph talks about scaling.
I've rewritten it to merge together more cleanly (I think).

> eventually applies pressure to the cluster - causing more hardware to be provisioned.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
eventually applies pressure to the cluster - causing more capacity to be provisioned.
```

"causing more hardware to be provisioned" doesn't sound right, maybe more "capacity" to be provisioned?

Author: changed "causing additional resources to be provisioned"

As work completes, the pods terminate, and the cluster can either allocate those resources to other tasks, or release them.

This reduces the running and maintenance costs associated a fleet of physical (or virtual) worker machines.

## Is this for you?

> OctopusDeploy provides a number of ways for you to provide Worker compute resources:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Octopus Deploy provides a number of ways for you to provide Worker compute resources:
```

1. Taking it directly from your Octopus Server instance
    i. Great place to start, and fine for smaller installations, but can be limiting in large systems
2. If cloud-hosted, you may be using the Dynamic Workers supplied in cloud
3. Self-managed VMs or physical machines.

> The Kubernetes worker is may not reduce complexity for the first groups. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Kubernetes worker may not reduce complexity for the first groups. 
```

Whereas group-3 is likely to see significant benefits through reduced worker-management.

> So if you're in group-3, you may find the Kubernetes Worker allows you to replace a fleet of workers machines, with a single Kubernetes Worker. One which will scale with your workloads.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So if you're in group-3, you may find the Kubernetes Worker allows you to replace a fleet of worker-machines, with a single Kubernetes Worker. One that will scale with your workloads.
```

## How To install the Kubernetes worker

> The Kubernetes Worker can be installed via the Kubernetes Agent [helm chart](https://hub.docker.com/r/octopusdeploy/kubernetes-agent) - you can do this manually via the command-line, but a far simpler method is to use the “installation wizard” provided by the OctopusDeploy Web portal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Kubernetes Worker can be installed via the Kubernetes Agent [helm chart](https://hub.docker.com/r/octopusdeploy/kubernetes-agent) - you can do this manually via the command-line, but a far simpler method is to use the “installation wizard” provided by the Octopus Deploy Web portal.
```

![Set Kubernetes Worker Properties](add-kubernetes-worker-properties.png)

3. The Kubernetes worker needs a shared filesystem. You have the option of providing an existing storage class (under “Show Advanced”) or using a default Network File System (NFS) storage pod. The NFS storage pod is an easy, low-configuration storage option that doesn’t need extra volumes or storage classes to be configured in the cluster first. To use NFS storage, you must install an extra Helm chart.

![Install NFS Helm Chart](install-nfs-helm-chart.png)

4. At the end of the wizard, Octopus generates a Helm command that you copy and paste into a terminal connected to the target cluster. After it’s executed, Helm intsalls all the required resources and starts the agent.

![Install Kubernetes Worker Helm Chart](install-kubernetes-worker-helm-chart.png)

5. If left open, the installation dialog waits for the worker to establish a connection and run a health check. Once successful, the Kubernetes worker is ready for use!

![Kubernetes Worker Installed Successfully](kubernetes-helm-chart-installed-success.png)

## How does it communicate?

> The Kubernetes Worker uses the same polling communications protocol as Octopus Tentacle.It lets the worker connect from the cluster to Octopus Server (via proxy as required), solving potential network access issues.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Kubernetes Worker uses the same polling communications protocol as Octopus Tentacle. It lets the worker connect from the cluster to Octopus Server (via proxy as required), solving potential network access issues.
```

## Inbuilt tooling 
When work-packages are sent to the Kubernetes Worker, the actual operation is executed within an Octopus Deploy [Worker-tools](https://hub.docker.com/r/octopusdeploy/worker-tools) container.

> If the worker-tools is not appropriate for your workloads, two options exist:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the Worker-tools image is not appropriate for your workloads, two options exist:
```
Maybe capitalise to here indicate this is _the_ Octopus Worker-tools image?

1. Override the default container on the specific deployment step (as per standard workers),
2. Change the image used by all Worker operations via the chart's `Values`.

## How to customize the Kubernetes worker

> The installation wizard creates a Kubernetes worker which is appropriate for 90% of expected workloads.

Reviewer 3: was the `90%` figured based on something :) ?

Author: magic - replaced with "majority"

> 2. Change the image used by all Worker operations via the chart's `Values`.

Reviewer 2: Both these points can have links to more specific instructions

1. [link](https://octopus.com/docs/projects/steps/execution-containers-for-workers) to the execution containers for workers docs. 
2. [link](https://github.com/OctopusDeploy/docs/pull/2416/files#diff-6be41cbda3e4ea7cf27e51bb8636b5ba5e816a072f2261ee0c35087542fc0dd0R42) to doc section about customising the default worker image on script pods (once the k8 workers docs is actually released)

> For the rest,  manual customization is available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the rest, manual customization is available.
```

> Many aspects of the worker can be configured via its `Values`. Fopr now, these customisations must be performed via the command

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Many aspects of the worker can be configured via its `values`. For now, these customisations must be performed via the command
```

non capitalised values is the correct one? earlier was non-caps.

Author: I found a reference in the Kubernetes docs to 'Values', a kubernetes proper noun? For now, will go with capitalized V

line using a Helm upgrade command (or setting them manually during initial install).

> The full list of customisations are documented in the `Readme.md` of the [helm chart](https://hub.docker.com/r/octopusdeploy/kubernetes-agent).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The full list of customizations are documented in the `Readme.md` of the [helm chart](https://hub.docker.com/r/octopusdeploy/kubernetes-agent).
```
I thought something in the pipeline for docs and blogs, will force us spelling, so prepare for that maybe?

Author: Definitely docs - maybe not blogs :/ Thanks for catching this one.

## Easy ways to try it out!
The Kubernetes Worker has been proven to work in a variety of clusters - if it's something you'd like to try, we recommend using
a lightweight Kubernetes cluster such as:
* [Minikube](https://minikube.sigs.k8s.io/docs/start/?arch=%2Fmacos%2Farm64%2Fstable%2Fbinary+download)
* [Kind](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/docs/user/quick-start/)

As part of install, each of these will configure a kubernetes context in your terminal, allowing helm to connect to the installed
cluster.

## When do I get to use it?
It’s on Cloud instances already, and will be available to self-hosted customers in 2024.3, which is coming out in a few weeks.

## More information & support

> The OctopusDeploy documentation suite covers the use of the Kubernetes Worker, otherwise reach out to our [community slack](https://octopususergroup.slack.com/archives/CBQ3FPQAH), or direct to our support in case of trouble.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Octopus Deploy documentation suite covers the use of the Kubernetes Worker, otherwise reach out to our [community slack](https://octopususergroup.slack.com/archives/CBQ3FPQAH), or direct to our support in case of trouble.
```

This wizard will guide you through a series of steps to capture values defining your worker, and provide the Helm command required to install the defined worker.

1. In the sidebar menu, navigate to Deploy → Infrastructure → Workers → Add Worker → Add Worker → Kubernetes

![Add Kubernetes Worker](add-kubernetes-worker.png)

2. This launches the Kubernetes Worker installation wizard. Here you can name the worker, specify (and create) the worker pool(s) to which it should belong. To create a new Worker Pool, select the “+” symbol to dropdown required pool creation fields.

![Set Kubernetes Worker Properties](add-kubernetes-worker-properties.png)

3. The Kubernetes worker needs a shared filesystem. You have the option of providing an existing storage class (under “Show Advanced”) or using a default Network File System (NFS) storage pod. The NFS storage pod is an easy, low-configuration storage option that doesn’t need extra volumes or storage classes to be configured in the cluster first. To use NFS storage, you must install an extra Helm chart.

![Install NFS Helm Chart](install-nfs-helm-chart.png)

> 4. At the end of the wizard, Octopus generates a Helm command that you copy and paste into a terminal connected to the target cluster. After it’s executed, Helm intsalls all the required resources and starts the agent.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. At the end of the wizard, Octopus generates a Helm command that you copy and paste into a terminal connected to the target cluster. After it’s executed, Helm installs all the required resources and starts the agent.
```

Now, we've built a Kubernetes worker – an extension to the agent that can execute *any* workload in the cluster, not just Kubernetes commands. 

In this post, I explain how it works and how you can use it. 

## Background

To appreciate how this new worker helps you, it's worth explaining the types of machines involved in a deployment: 

1. Deployment targets - machines that host runtime software packages
2. Workers - compute resources to execute the deployment process. 

We'll only deal with workers here – computers needed during a deployment that are otherwise idle. 

When using a physical or virtual machine as a worker, it must be adequately provisioned to handle peak-deployment loads. Unfortunately, when no operations are running, the worker machine holds onto those resources. 

With a Kubernetes worker, after a deployment is complete, the hardware resources get returned to the cluster. This lets the cluster repurpose or release them. 

> The Kubernetes worker executes each deployment task in a new Kubernetes Pod (known as horizontal scaling). More resources are automatically provisioned when there's enough pressure on the cluster. Then, as work gets completed and the pods terminate, the additional resources get returned to the cluster. This reduces the running and maintenance costs associated with a fleet of physical (or virtual) worker machines.

Author: This sentence felt sort of off - is it worth rewording to something more like:

This reduces cost/effort in comparison to supporting a similar workload on physical/virtual worker machines.

> The Kubernetes worker executes each deployment task in a new Kubernetes Pod (known as horizontal scaling). More resources are automatically provisioned when there's enough pressure on the cluster. Then, as work gets completed and the pods terminate, the additional resources get returned to the cluster. This reduces the running and maintenance costs associated with a fleet of physical (or virtual) worker machines.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The Kubernetes worker executes each deployment task in a new Kubernetes Pod (known as horizontal scaling). More resources are automatically provisioned when there's enough pressure on the cluster. Then, as work gets completed and the pods terminate, the additional resources get returned to the cluster. This reduces the costand effort in comparison to supporting a similar workload on physical and virtual worker machines.
```

## Is the new worker for you?

Until now, resources for workers could come from a variety of places: 

1. Directly from your Octopus Server instance. (This is a great place to start and acceptable for smaller installations, but it can be limiting in large systems.)

> 2. You may be using the dynamic workers supplied by the Octopus Cloud platform if you're cloud-hosted.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
2. Dynamic workers supplied by the Octopus Cloud platform if you're cloud-hosted.
```

3. Self-managed VMs or physical machines. 

The Kubernetes worker may not reduce complexity for the first 2 groups. But, if you're in group 3, you may find the Kubernetes worker lets you replace a fleet of worker machines with a single Kubernetes worker that scales with your workloads. You don't need to deploy to Kubernetes or be an expert Kubernetes user to benefit from the Kubernetes worker.

## How to install the Kubernetes worker

You can install the Kubernetes worker using the Kubernetes agent [Helm chart](https://hub.docker.com/r/octopusdeploy/kubernetes-agent). You can do this manually via the command-line, or, far simpler, use the installation wizard we provide in the Octopus web portal.

This wizard guides you through the steps to capture values defining your worker, and provides the Helm command to install the worker.

> 1. In the sidebar menu, navigate to **Deploy**, then **Workers** under **Infrastructure**, then **Add Worker**, then **Add Worker**, and then **Kubernetes Worker**.

Reviewer 4: @rain-on just checking, is this supposed to say "Add Worker" twice?

Author: that is definitely a mistake, duplication should be removed.

> 1. In the sidebar menu, navigate to **Deploy**, then **Workers** under **Infrastructure**, then **Add Worker**, then **Add Worker**, and then **Kubernetes Worker**.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
1. In the sidebar menu, navigate to **Deploy**, then **Workers** under **Infrastructure**, then **Add Worker**, and then **Kubernetes Worker**.
```

![Add Kubernetes worker](add-kubernetes-worker.png)

2. This launches the Kubernetes worker installation wizard. Here, you can name the worker and specify (and create) the worker pool(s) it belongs to. To create a new worker pool, go to the **Select worker pools** field and click the **+** symbol to dropdown the pool creation fields.

![Set Kubernetes Worker Properties](add-kubernetes-worker-properties.png)

3. The Kubernetes worker needs a shared filesystem. You can provide an existing storage class (under **Show Advanced**) or use a default Network File System (NFS) storage pod. The NFS storage pod is an easy, low-configuration storage option that doesn’t need extra volumes or storage classes configured in the cluster first. To use NFS storage, you must install an extra Helm chart.

![Install NFS Helm Chart](install-nfs-helm-chart.png)

> 4. At the end of the wizard, Octopus generates a Helm command that you copy and paste into a terminal connected to the target cluster. After it’s executed, Helm intsalls all the resources and starts the agent.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
4. At the end of the wizard, Octopus generates a Helm command that you copy and paste into a terminal connected to the target cluster. After it’s executed, Helm installs all the resources and starts the agent.
```

![Install Kubernetes worker Helm chart](install-kubernetes-worker-helm-chart.png)

5. If left open, the installation dialog waits for the worker to establish a connection and run a health check. Once successful, the Kubernetes worker is ready for use!

![Kubernetes worker installed successfully](kubernetes-helm-chart-installed-success.png)

> ## How does the worker communicate?

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## How the worker communicates
```

The Kubernetes worker uses the same polling communications protocol as Octopus Tentacle. It lets the worker connect from the cluster to Octopus Server (via proxy as needed), solving potential network access issues.

## In-built tooling 

When work-packages are sent to the Kubernetes worker, the actual operation runs in an Octopus Deploy [worker-tools](https://hub.docker.com/r/octopusdeploy/worker-tools) container.

If worker-tools is not appropriate for your workloads, you have 2 options:

1. Override the default container on the specific deployment step (as per standard workers).
2. Change the image used by all worker operations via the chart's values.

## How to customize the Kubernetes worker

The installation wizard creates a Kubernetes worker that is appropriate for the majority of workloads.

For the rest, manual customization is available.

> You can configure many aspects of the worker via its values. For now, you need to perform these customizations via the command-line using a Helm upgrade command (or setting them manually during install).

Author: Didn't like the word "via" being in there twice - but that might just be my itch :)
```suggestion
You can configure many aspects of the worker my modifying its Helm values. For now, you need to perform these customizations via the command-line using a Helm upgrade command (or setting them manually during install).
```

> For the full list of customizations, you can refer to [helm chart README.md](https://hub.docker.com/r/octopusdeploy/kubernetes-agent).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For the full list of customizations, you can refer to the [Helm chart README.md](https://hub.docker.com/r/octopusdeploy/kubernetes-agent).
```

> For the full list of customizations, you can refer to the [Helm chart README.md](https://hub.docker.com/r/octopusdeploy/kubernetes-agent).

Author: ```suggestion
For the full list of customizations, you can refer to the [Helm chart README.md](https://github.com/OctopusDeploy/helm-charts/tree/main/charts/kubernetes-agent).
```
